---
title: "Updating Graph-based Index with Fine-grained Blocks for Large-scale Streaming High-dimensional Vectors"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2025-03-04-updating-graph-based-index
excerpt: 'A novel vector database indexing method enabling real-time updates for streaming high-dimensional data with hardware-aware optimizations.'
date: 2025-03-04
venue: 'arXiv preprint'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.00402v1'
citation: 'Yu, S., Lin, S., Gong, S., Xie, Y., Liu, R., Zhou, Y., <strong>Zuo, P.</strong>, Zhang, Y., Sun, J., & Yu, G. (2025). Updating Graph-based Index with Fine-grained Blocks for Large-scale Streaming High-dimensional Vectors. <i>arXiv preprint</i> arXiv:2503.00402.'
---
To meet the demand for large-scale high-dimensional vector approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS), many graph-based ANNS systems have been widely adopted due to their excellent efficiency-accuracy trade-offs. Nevertheless, in dynamic scenarios involving frequent vector insertions and deletions, existing systems mitigate the overhead by employing batch update strategies, which improve update performance by increasing the batch size. However, excessively increasing the batch size leads to index update delays, which, in turn, cause a significant degradation in query accuracy. This work aims to improve the performance of graph-based ANNS systems in small-batch update scenarios, achieving a balance between update efficiency and query accuracy. We identify two key issues with existing batch update strategies during small-batch updates: (1) significant data waste in disk read/write operations, and (2) frequent triggering of large-scale pruning operations involving high-cost vector computations by the incremental algorithm. To address these issues, we introduce Greator, a disk-based system with a novel graph-based index update method. The core idea of Greator is to accumulate only a small number of vector updates per batch to prevent excessive index degradation, while designing an efficient fine-grained incremental update scheme that reduces data wastage during I/O operations. Additionally, we introduce a lightweight incremental graph repair strategy to reduce pruning operations, thereby minimizing the expensive vector computations. Based on extensive experiments on real-world datasets, Greator can integrate continuous updates faster than the state-of-the-art solutions, achieving up to 4.16X speedup, while maintaining stable index quality to produce low query latency and high query accuracy of approximate vector searches.
